Now, we learned how we can use refs
in a functional component.
We can import the useRef hook here from react.
And once we did that,
we can create a ref,
like the todoTextInputRef here, for example,
and we call useRef like this
to create such a reference.
Then we can go to the HTML element
to which you wanna connect the ref,
typically an input element or a text area
or something like this.
And we set the special ref property on that element
and point at our ref.
In this case, we point at todoTextInputRef.
Now, if I do that, you see I get an error down there though.
Again with a very long text
that in the end ref is receiving the wrong type of data.
Now, ref wants a ref created with useRef,
that's not wrong, but we're not explicit enough
about the ref we're creating here.
In vanilla JavaScript,
this code works because we don't have the concept
of extra type annotations.
But when working with TypeScript,
TypeScript actually wants to know a bit more about our ref.
When we create it here,
TypeScript actually has no idea
that we eventually will connect it to a input element.
That's only clear down there.
But since it's not clear in this line,
we could use this ref in any possible way.
We can connect it to any HTML element.
And that's, in the end, the kind of error we get here.
We're passing a ref as a ref
to this input that is not clearly focused
on this kind of HTML element.
This could also be a ref that wants a button.
So we have to be more explicit about the kind
of data we will store in this ref eventually.
And we do this again with a generic type.
That's why useRef actually is a generic type out of the box.
We can add the angled brackets here now
to explicitly set the concrete type of ref we wanna create
in this instance.
So ref, useRef is able to work with all kinds
of data we will store in this ref here,
all kinds of HTML objects we could connect with this ref
but we now have to specify which concrete value
or HTML element we plan
on storing into this specific ref object
we are creating here.
And here I know that I wanna store such a input element
and that has a built-in type.
And that's the HTMLInputElement type.
All those DOM elements have built-in types,
which you can use in TypeScript to refer to them
and for the input, it's the HTMLInputElement.
For a button, it would be the HTMLButtonElement.
For a paragraph, it would be the HTMLParagraphElement.
And so on.
You can also always visit the MDN page
of an element, like here the input element.
And even though that, of course,
is not focusing on TypeScript at all,
on that page, you will find information like this.
Like here you find that the input element is based
on the HTMLInputElement interface.
And that's why we use that as a type here.
So now we are making it clear
that the ref we're creating here
will actually be connected to an HTMLInputElement.
But I'm still getting an error down there.
And we're getting this error
because actually we have to set a default value here
because this ref could already be a sign
to some other element maybe,
out of the box by default.
And that's why we should provide a starting value here
and at the beginning,
we have no connection
and therefore, the starting value is null.
But once we add this,
this error goes away
because now we are creating a ref,
which will eventually be connected to an HTMLInputElement
but which has no initial value.
And we have to be explicit about this
in case of useRef.
And that's how you then create a ref when using TypeScript
and how you then connect it to an element.
And that then again just works as you learned it.
Now, inside of the submitHandler,
we can, of course, get the enteredText
by referring to the todoTextInputRef.current.
That's how we always do it for refs.
They always have this current property,
which then holds the actual value.
Dot, and now the great thing
is that since we explicitly set this ref
to hold an InputElement,
an HTMLInputElement, we get great autocompletion here.
And we get all those input element object properties
as suggestions here.
So all the properties input element objects
can have in JavaScript.
And hence, we, for example,
also get this value autosuggestion.
You will notice this question mark
after current though,
which in my case was added automatically by the IDE.
Where is this coming from?
This question mark was added automatically by my IDE here
because the ref is not necessarily set to a value yet
when we use it.
Of course, here as a developer,
we know that when the submitHandler is called,
todoTextInputRef will be connected to an element
because this function can only be called
when this form was submitted
and that form can only be submitted
after this ref was connected.
But of course, theoretically,
I could also try to extract a value right here
after defining this ref
and in that case, the ref would not be connected yet.
And TypeScript doesn't deeply analyze our code,
it doesn't know that this technically can't be called
before this connection's established.
In that case, this question mark addition here signals
to TypeScript that it tries to access value
and if that succeeds,
the entered value will be stored in enteredText
but if that fails,
if the connection should not be established yet,
null will be stored in enteredText.
And that's why here the inferred type of enteredText
actually also is string or undefined,
which is basically the same as null here.
So that means that TypeScript doesn't necessarily know
that it will be able to extract this value.
Now, if you as a developer are sure though
that at this point of time
there will be a non-null value,
so here, in this case, you know that the connection
has been established,
you can use an exclamation mark instead of a question mark.
This special annotation tells TypeScript
that you know that this possibly nullish value
will never be null in this spot.
And therefore, of course,
you should only use this annotation
if you are 100% sure that this can't be null.
So in this case,
that this connection will have been established.
And then the inferred type here
is just string, not string or defined
because you are sure
that the connection will always be established
and that extracting the value will therefore always succeed.
And we can definitely do that here
since we know that technically submitHandler,
the way we write our code,
can't be called before this line of code
was parsed and this connection was therefore established.
But that is an important concept,
which I definitely also wanted to briefly explore here.
Now, it is worth pointing out though
that these question mark
and exclamation mark operators
are not related to refs specifically.
This is also not a React-specific feature.
Instead, these are regular operators,
which you can use in TypeScript
when you are working with values that could be null.
With question mark, you're always saying try
to get me that value
and if it's null, store null in the constant
or wherever I wanna store that value.
With the exclamation mark,
you're saying I'm certain that here we won't be dealing
with null, so therefore, drill into this object,
into this property
and give me the actual stored non-null value
and therefore then you will always get that value.
But of course, as explained,
that only works if you are certain
that this can't be null.
So these are two generally important operators
in TypeScript, which here are very important
when working with refs,
since refs could be null or could not be connected
to any value at this point.
And with that, we've now got the enteredText
and we could now validate it
and check if enteredText,
once we trim it maybe is empty,
which would mean that nothing was entered in the end,
just a bunch of blanks.
Or anything like that.
So here we could throw an error.
I'll just return though.
If we make it past this if check,
we know that we have a valid input
and just to make this clear,
this is not about whether the ref is connected or not,
this is just validating the text entered by the user,
which has nothing to do with TypeScript.
But once we made it past this if check,
we now wanna add that todo
to our list of todos.
And we probably don't do this here
inside of our NewTodo component function.
Instead, we're managing the list of todos
in the App component
and hence, we'll need a way of communicating back
to this App component to add the new todo there
and we're going to do that in the next lecture.